Migrating from previous versions
================================

Version ``0.3.0`` introduced several breaking changes, so repositories dependent on previous
versions need to be modified if you update |showyourwork|. This page contains a list of
things you'll want to do when migrating over.

.. note:: 
    
    If you're running into issues while migrating from a previous version of 
    |showyourwork|, or if the steps below are too complicated, feel free to 
    open an `issue <https://github.com/showyourwork/showyourwork/issues/new>`__ 
    on the |showyourwork| GitHub page and we'll help you with the migration!

.. note::

    If you're using an older version of |showyourwork| and things are working
    just fine for your article, there's no need to upgrade! Your article will
    continue to work and can be reproduced by others. Previous versions of 
    |showyourwork| will remain on GitHub and their documentation on readthedocs
    will persist. The downside is that you won't benefit from newer functionality
    or bugfixes (in case you find issues with |showyourwork|).


1. First, install |showyourwork| locally (see :doc:`install`). Prior to ``0.3.0``,
   |showyourwork| was entirely contained in a submodule located in the article
   repository itself. It is now a Python package that can easily be installed with ``pip``.

2. Delete the ``showyourwork`` folder at the top level of your repository. Since this is 
   a git submodule, you should also delete everything under ``[submodule "showyourwork"]``
   in the ``.gitmodules`` file. If that file is otherwise empty, you can delete it as well.

3. Remove the boilerplate code from the top-level ``Snakefile``. Unless you added custom
   Snakemake rules for your workflow, this file should now be empty by default. The newer
   versions of |showyourwork| import this Snakefile into the main workflow file (rather than
   the other way around), so no user-side boilerplate code is needed.

4. Delete the ``Makefile``. The new version of |showyourwork| no longer relies on ``make``.
   Articles should now be compiled by running the ``showyourwork`` command line tool.

5. Delete ``.github/workflows/showyourwork.yml``. Copy over the workflow files from
   `the example repository <https://github.com/showyourwork/showyourwork-example/tree/main/.github/workflows>`__.
   Copy over any custom code from your previous workflow file
   (if you manually added/changed stuff) to the new ``build*.yml`` files. Since
   the workflow files changed, you might have to update the workflow badge in your ``README.md``
   file (i.e., replace occurrences of ``showyourwork.yml`` with ``build.yml``).

6. Create a folder called ``src/tex`` and move your manuscript (e.g., ``ms.tex``),
   bibliography (e.g., ``bib.bib``), and any other custom LaTeX files into it. Hint: to preserve your
   git history for those files, use ``git mv`` instead of ``mv``.

7. Create a folder called ``src/tex/figures`` and add a ``.gitignore`` file inside. Copy its
   contents from `the example repository <https://github.com/showyourwork/showyourwork-example/blob/main/src/tex/figures/.gitignore>`__.
   This folder will contain all the figure outputs (e.g., ``*.pdf``, ``*.png``, etc.), so nothing
   in this folder should be tracked by git.

8. Create a folder called ``src/tex/output`` and add a ``.gitignore`` file inside. Copy its
   contents from `the example repository <https://github.com/showyourwork/showyourwork-example/blob/main/src/tex/output/.gitignore>`__.
   This folder will contain any other output generated by your workflow and included in your TeX file, so nothing
   in this folder should be tracked by git.

9. Add a file called ``showyourwork.sty`` to ``src/tex``. You can copy it over from
   `the example repository <https://github.com/showyourwork/showyourwork-example/blob/main/src/tex/showyourwork.sty>`__.
   This is the new |showyourwork| LaTeX style file.

10. Read about changes to the way |showyourwork| parses LaTeX at :doc:`latex`. The two big changes
    are that you must now explicitly import the ``showyourwork`` style file (see above) using 
    ``\usepackage{showyourwork}`` and that relationships beteween figure scripts and figure files
    are no longer inferred from the figure ``\label``. Instead, users should explicitly provide
    the path to the script (relative to ``src/scripts``) that generates figures inside a 
    ``figure`` environment via the ``\script`` command. Edit your figure environments in your
    tex file accordingly; see :doc:`latex` for details, as there are a few other subtleties.

11. Rename the ``src/figures`` directory to ``src/scripts``. This folder should still contain
    your figure scripts--just its naming convention in |showyourwork| changed. Hint: to preserve your
    git history across this rename, do ``git mv src/figures src/scripts`` instead of a simple
    ``mv``.

12. Add a file called ``paths.py`` to ``src/scripts``. You can copy it over from
    `the example repository <https://github.com/showyourwork/showyourwork-example/blob/main/src/scripts/paths.py>`__.
    This file contains useful absolute paths to the various directories in your repository
    (see below).

13. Given the new directory structure (see above), figure scripts (in ``src/scripts``) must now output figure
    files into the ``src/tex/figures`` directory. You will therefore have to edit your scripts to
    ensure they save figure outputs to that directory. Importantly, you should ensure your scripts
    will save the figures to the correct directory **regardless of where they are executed from**.
    The new version of |showyourwork| executes scripts from the top-level directory of your repository,
    so **any relative paths in your scripts are relative to the root of your repository**. To
    make things easier, we recommend you use the paths provided in the ``paths.py`` file. For example,
    to save a figure called ``figure.pdf`` to the correct output directory, import the ``paths``
    module and run (e.g.) ``fig.savefig(paths.figures / "figure.pdf")``. The same applies to
    datasets; a dataset called located at ``src/data/dataset.txt`` can be accessed as
    ``paths.data / "dataset.txt"``. Read more about the ``paths.py`` file at :doc:`layout`.

14. Finally, the syntax for the ``showyourwork.yml`` config file changed, particularly
    with regards to ``zenodo`` datasets. Users should also now provide an explicit version
    of |showyourwork| using the ``version`` key. Please see :doc:`config` for details.

You can see an example diff of a repository that went through this upgrade
`here <https://github.com/kazewong/BackPop/commit/605d7d404fc094efb8fb08aa9e5fdcebea28c75e>`__.
If you run into any issues, have questions, or would like help with the upgrade,
please create an `issue <https://github.com/showyourwork/showyourwork/issues/new>`__ 
on GitHub and we'll be more than happy to help!